Update Bits AI SRE documentation (#33030)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/bits_ai/bits_ai_sre/investigate_issues.md

---
title: Investigate issues
description: "Configure Bits AI SRE to automatically investigate monitor alerts and provide root cause analysis for faster incident resolution."
aliases: 
- /bits_ai/bits_ai_sre/investigate_alerts/
---

## Get started with alert investigations

> {{< callout url="http://datadoghq.com/product-preview/bits-ai-dev-agent" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Bits AI SRE investigations from APM latency graphs and APM Watchdog stories are in Preview. Click <strong>Request Access</strong> to join the Preview program.
{{< /callout >}}

The starting points of a Bits AI SRE investigation are:

> - Monitor alerts, which you can trigger in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Monitor alerts, which you can trigger in two ways:
```

Author: Do these three things happen in sequence? Trying to understand why an ordered list would be better here than an unordered one!

Reviewer: Nope they don't, we can revert back to unordered

  - [**Manual**](#manual-monitor-alerts): Start from an individual monitor alert, APM latency graph, or APM Watchdog story
  - [**Automatic**](#enable-automatic-investigations): Configure monitors so that whenever they alert, Bits launches an investigation
- [APM latency graphs on service pages](#apm-latency-graphs-on-service-pages)

> - [APM latency Watchdog stories](#apm-latency-watchdog-stories)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [APM latency Watchdog stories](#apm-latency-watchdog-stories)
```

### Manually start an investigation

#### Monitor alerts {#manual-monitor-alerts}

You can invoke Bits on an individual monitor alert or warn event from several entry points:

##### Option 1: Bits AI SRE Monitors list {#monitor-list}
1. Go to [**Bits AI SRE** > **Monitors** > **Supported**][5].
1. Click **Investigate Recent Alerts** and select an alert.

##### Option 2: Monitor status page
Navigate to the monitor status page of a [Bits AI SRE-supported monitor](#monitor-list) and click **Investigate with Bits AI SRE** in the top-right corner.

##### Option 3: Monitor event side panel
In the monitor event side panel of a [Bits AI SRE-supported monitor](#monitor-list), click **Investigate with Bits AI SRE**.

##### Option 4: Slack
To use the Slack integration, [connect your Slack workspace to Bits AI SRE][8].

In Slack, reply to a monitor notification with `@Datadog Investigate this alert`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< callout url="http://datadoghq.com/product-preview/bits-ai-dev-agent" >}}
Bits AI SRE investigations from APM latency graphs and APM Watchdog stories are in Preview. Click <strong>Request Access</strong> to join the Preview program.
{{< /callout >}}
```

  - [**Automatic**](#enable-automatic-investigations): Configure monitors so that whenever they alert, Bits launches an investigation
- [APM latency graphs on service pages](#apm-latency-graphs-on-service-pages)
- [APM latency Watchdog stories](#apm-latency-watchdog-stories)

### Manually start an investigation

#### Monitor alerts {#manual-monitor-alerts}

You can invoke Bits on an individual monitor alert or warn event from several entry points:

##### Option 1: Bits AI SRE Monitors list {#monitor-list}
1. Go to [**Bits AI SRE** > **Monitors** > **Supported**][5].
1. Click **Investigate Recent Alerts** and select an alert.

##### Option 2: Monitor status page
Navigate to the monitor status page of a [Bits AI SRE-supported monitor](#monitor-list) and click **Investigate with Bits AI SRE** in the top-right corner.

##### Option 3: Monitor event side panel
In the monitor event side panel of a [Bits AI SRE-supported monitor](#monitor-list), click **Investigate with Bits AI SRE**.

##### Option 4: Slack
To use the Slack integration, [connect your Slack workspace to Bits AI SRE][8].

In Slack, reply to a monitor notification with `@Datadog Investigate this alert`.

#### APM latency

> {{< callout url="http://datadoghq.com/product-preview/bits-ai-dev-agent" >}}

Reviewer: Yes perfect

---
title: Investigate issues
description: "Use Bits AI SRE to automatically investigate monitor alerts and provide root cause analysis for faster incident resolution."
aliases: 
- /bits_ai/bits_ai_sre/investigate_alerts/
---

## Get started with alert investigations

> The starting points of a Bits AI SRE investigation are:

Reviewer 2: I feel like this could be made more user-friendly with:

```suggestion
You can start a Bits AI SRE investigation from:
```

- Monitor alerts, which you can trigger in two ways:
  - [**Manual**](#manual-monitor-alerts): Start from an individual monitor alert, APM latency graph, or APM Watchdog story
  - [**Automatic**](#enable-automatic-investigations): Configure monitors so that whenever they alert, Bits launches an investigation
- [APM latency graphs on service pages](#apm-latency-graphs-on-service-pages)

> - [APM latency Watchdog stories](#apm-latency-watchdog-stories)

Reviewer 2: This list here is a little conceptually odd to me vis-a-vis the layout of the page. It seems like rather than the current hierarchy of concepts, it's more like

- Manual
   - Monitor alerts
   - APM latency graphs
   - APM latency Watchdog stories
- Automatic
   - Monitor alerts again

#### Option 2: Configure automatic investigations for a single monitor
1. Open the monitor's status page and click **Edit**.
1. Scroll to **Configure notifications & automations** and toggle **Investigate with Bits AI SRE**.

<div class="alert alert-info"><ul><li>Enabling automatic investigations using the Datadog API or Terraform is not supported.</li><li>An investigation initiates when a monitor transitions to the alert state.</li><li>Transitions to the warn or no data state, <a href="/monitors/notify/#renotify">renotifications</a>, and test notifications do not trigger automatic investigations.
</li></ul></div>

### Supported monitors

Bits is able to run investigations on the following monitor types:
  - Metric
  - Anomaly
  - Forecast
  - Integration
  - Outlier
  - Logs
  - APM (`APM Metrics` type only; `Trace Analytics` is not supported)
  - Synthetics (API tests only)

#### Best practices: Add investigation context to your monitors {#best-practices}
Think of onboarding Bits as you would a new teammate: the more context you provide, the better it can investigate.

> 1. **Include Datadog telemetry links**: Add at least one helpful telemetry link in the monitor message. Think about the first place you'd normally look in Datadog when this monitor triggers. It could be a link to any of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Include Datadog telemetry links**: Add at least one helpful telemetry link in the monitor message. Think about the first place you'd normally look in Datadog when this monitor triggers. It could be a link to any of the following:
```

Feel like this list should be unordered

   - Datadog dashboard
   - Logs
   - Traces
   - Datadog notebook with helpful widgets
   - Confluence runbook page containing Datadog telemetry links (requires a configured [Confluence integration][3])

   Bits uses these links during the "Runbook" step of the initial investigation to identify potential problem areas. Because these links are user-defined, you have control over what Bits reviews, ensuring it focuses on the same data you would, and giving you the flexibility to tailor investigations to your team's workflows. You don't have to format the links in any particular way; plain links work.

> 2. **Add service scoping**: For monitors associated with a service, add a service tag to the monitor, or filter or group the monitor query by service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Add service scoping**: For monitors associated with a service, add a service tag to the monitor, or filter or group the monitor query by service.
```

unordered list

   {{< img src="bits_ai/optimization_example.png" alt="Example monitor with optimization steps applied" style="width:100%;" >}}

For additional suggestions on how to optimize investigations, see [Help Bits learn][9].

## How Bits AI SRE investigates

Investigations happen in two phases:

> 1. Bits begins by **gathering initial context** on the problem and any information that might help it troubleshoot further. Depending on the starting point of the investigation, you may see one or more of the following sections:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Bits begins by **gathering initial context** on the problem and any information that might help it troubleshoot further. Depending on the starting point of the investigation, you may see one or more of the following types of step:
```

Is that correct? "Sections" doesn't seem like the right word here

   - **Memory**: If you have previously interacted with an investigation for the same monitor, Bits recalls any [memories][9] associated with the monitor to inform and accelerate the current investigation.
   - **General search**: Bits automatically scans your Datadog environment to gather additional context about what's happening around the alert.
   - **Trace Analysis**: If the starting point is an APM latency graph, Bits automatically inspects anomalous traces to identify the specific services or tags contributing to latency hotspots. 
   
   {{< img src="bits_ai/bits_ai_sre_investigation_context.png" alt="Flowchart showing Bits AI SRE combining runbook, memory, and general search into initial findings" style="width:100%;" >}}
1. Using the collected context, Bits **builds multiple root cause hypotheses and tests them concurrently**.
   - Today, Bits looks at the following data sources:
     - Metrics
     - Traces
     - Logs
     - Dashboards
     - [Change events][4]
     - Kubernetes events
   - Each hypothesis ends in one of three states: validated, invalidated, or inconclusive.

>      - When a hypothesis is validated, Bits generates sub-hypotheses and repeats the same investigative process on them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Bits looks at the following data sources:
     - Metrics
     - Traces
     - Logs
     - Dashboards
     - [Change events][4]
     - Kubernetes events
   Each hypothesis ends in one of three states: validated, invalidated, or inconclusive. When a hypothesis is validated, Bits generates sub-hypotheses and repeats the same investigative process on them.
```
